Property definitions (#376)
Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE: optimade.rst

The response for these endpoints MUST include the following information in the :field:`data` field:

- **description**: Description of the entry.
- **properties**: A dictionary describing properties for this entry type, where each key is a property name and the value is an OPTIMADE Property Definition described in detail in the appendix `Property Definitions`_.
- **formats**: List of output formats available for this type of entry.
- **output\_fields\_by\_format**: Dictionary of available output fields for this entry type, where the keys are the values of the :field:`formats` list and the values are the keys of the :field:`properties` dictionary.

> Example (the multi-line string is indented for readability, but represents a multiline string with no indentation):

Reviewer: As far as I know, the indention doesn't matter too much because there is no support for multi-line strings support in JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example (note: the multi-line string is for readability only):
```

Author: Doesn't a newline inside a JSON string just place a newline in the string when parsed? Meaning that the multi-line string in that example would become a string with embedded newlines, which is what is intended?

Reviewer: As far as I know, it doesn't. The current JSON definition only supports the simple string which doesn't allow multiple lines and you have to explicitly use `\n` in the string to indicate a new line.

Author: It indeed looks like you are correct. So we should definitely insert `\n` where appropriate in that string, but also wrap it for readability. But then perhaps "(note: the description string has been wrapped for readability only)" would be more clear?

        "description": "a structures entry",
        "properties": {
          "nelements": {
            "type": ["integer", "null"],
            "title": "Number of elements",

>             "description": "Number of different elements in the structure as an integer.

Reviewer 2: It seems a bit superfluous to state here that the value is an integer when this is already defined in the type field.
```suggestion
            "description": "Number of different elements in the structure.
```

Author: This string echos exactly the one we presently have in Section 7, and I think it should. At a later point, when Section 7 hypothetically is removed and replaced with our standardized machine-readable property definitions, we can remove this if we agree.

Reviewer 2: You are right, this is indeed not the right place to discuss this. 
If I want to change this, I should start with the declaration of the nelements field in section 7.2.2

              -  Note: queries on this property can equivalently be formulated using `elements LENGTH`.
              -  A filter that matches structures that have exactly 4 elements: `nelements=4`.
              -  A filter that matches structures that have between 2 and 7 elements: `nelements>=2 AND nelements<=7`.",
            "examples": [
              3
            ],

>             "x-optimade-definition": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            "x-optimade-property": {
```
"x-optimade-property" might be more descriptive and the more general "x-optimade-definition" can be used later if it is needed.

              "version": "1.0.0",
              "sortable": true,
              "support": "should",
              "query": "full"
            }
          },
          "lattice_vectors": {
            "title": "Unit cell lattice vectors",
            "description": "The three lattice vectors in Cartesian coordinates, in ångström (Å).

            ...",

>             "x-optimade-unit": "angstrom",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The "unit" field could be part of "x-optimade-definition" as all the others.

>             "sortable": false,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            "x-optimade-definition":{ 
              "sortable": false
            },
```

Some features of the filtering language are marked OPTIONAL.
An implementation that encounters an OPTIONAL feature that it does not support MUST respond with error ``501 Not Implemented`` with an explanation of which OPTIONAL construct the error refers to.

Property Definitions
====================

An OPTIMADE *Property Definition* defines a specific property, which will be referred to as *the defined property* throughout this section.
The definition uses a dictionary-based construct that, when represented in the JSON output format, is compatible with the JSON Schema standard (for more information, see `Property Definition keys from JSON Schema`_).
The format of Property Definitions defined below allows nesting inner Property Definitions to define properties that are comprised by values organized in lists and dictionaries to arbitrary depth.

> The field data types used in this section refers to OPTIMADE data types, and the implementation maps these to the corresponding data types for the output format in which the property definition is expressed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The field data types used to describe properties in this section refers to OPTIMADE data types, and the implementation maps these to the corresponding data types for the output format used for the `info` end point, in which the property definition is expressed. Currently they are mapped to JSON types as they are used in the JSON API. 
```

Author: After some careful thinking about this, I think the sentence you were editing here just was not clear. I've now merged a version that I think is more clear. Please let me know what you think:

> To make a property definition expressible in any output format, the fields of the property definition below are specified using OPTIMADE data types.
> When a property definition is communicated using a specific data format (e.g., JSON), the property definition is implemented in that data format by mapping the OPTIMADE data types into the corresponding data types for that output format.

(Note that the use of JSON types *only* appear, and only should appear, in reference to the strings used for the "type" field. In no other ways are JSON types used over OPTIMADE types in this section.)

> A Property Definition MUST be formatted according to the combination of the requirements in the subsection `Property Definition keys from JSON Schema`_ below and the following additional requirements:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Property Definition MUST be composed according to the combination of the requirements in the subsection `Property Definition keys from JSON Schema`_ below and the following additional requirements:
```

  - :field:`version`: String.
    This string indicates the version of the property definition.
    The string SHOULD be in the format described by the `semantic versioning v2 <https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html>`__ standard.

  - :field:`unit-definitions`: List.
    A list of definitions of the symbols used in the Property Definition (including its nested levels) for physical units given as values of the :field:`x-optimade-unit` field.
    This field MUST be included if the defined property, at any level, includes an :field:`x-optimade-unit` with a value that is not :val:`dimensioneless` or :val:`inapplicable`.
    See subsection `Physical Units in Property Definitions`_ for the details on how units are represented in OPTIMADE Property Definitions and the precise format of this dictionary.

  - :field:`resource-uris`: List.
    A list of dictionaries that references remote resources that describe the property.
    The format of each dictionary is:

    **REQUIRED keys:**

    - :field:`relation`: String.
      A human-readable description of the relationship between the property and the remote resource, e.g., a "natural language description".

    - :field:`uri`: String.

>       An URI of the external resource (which MAY be a resolvable URL).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      A URI of the external resource (which MAY be a resolvable URL).
```

    - :val:`HAS ONLY`: indicating support for list property comparison with all or a subset of the OPTIONAL constructs using this operator. MUST NOT appear if the property is not of type List.

    - :val:`IS KNOWN`, :val:`IS UNKNOWN`: indicating support for filtering this property on unknown values using the respective operator.

- :field:`x-optimade-requirements`: Dictionary.
  A dictionary describing the level of OPTIMADE API functionality required by all implementations of this property.
  Omitting this field means the corresponding functionality is OPTIONAL.
  The dictionary has the same format as :field:`x-optimade-implementation`, except that it also allows the following OPTIONAL field:

  - :field:`support`: String.
    Describes the minimal required level of support for the Property by an implementation.
    This field SHOULD only appear in a :field:`x-optimade-requirements` that is at the outermost level of a Property Definition, as the meaning of its inclusion on other levels is not defined.
    The string MUST be one of the following:

>     - "must": the defined property MUST be recognized by the implementation (e.g., in filter strings) and MUST NOT be :val:`null`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`must`: the defined property MUST be recognized by the implementation (e.g., in filter strings) and MUST NOT be :val:`null`.
```

>     - "should": the defined property MUST be recognized by the implementation (e.g., in filter strings) and SHOULD NOT be :val:`null`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`should`: the defined property MUST be recognized by the implementation (e.g., in filter strings) and SHOULD NOT be :val:`null`.
```

>     - "may": it is OPTIONAL for the implementation to recognize the defined property and it MAY be equal to :val:`null`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`may`: it is OPTIONAL for the implementation to recognize the defined property and it MAY be equal to :val:`null`.
```

>     Omitting the field is equivalent to "may".

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Omitting the field is equivalent to :val:`may`.
```

    Note: the specification by this field of whether the defined property can be :val:`null` or not MUST match the value of the :field:`type` field.
    If :val:`null` values are allowed, that field must be a list where the string :val:`"null"` is the second element.

Property Definition keys from JSON Schema
-----------------------------------------

In addition to the requirements on the format of a Property Definition in the previous section, it MUST also adhere to the OPTIONAL and REQUIRED keys described in this subsection.

> The format described in this subsection form a subset of the `JSON Schema Validation Draft 2020-12 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation.html>`__ and `JSON Schema Core Draft 2020-12 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core.html>`__ standards.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The format described in this subsection forms a subset of the `JSON Schema Validation Draft 2020-12 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation.html>`__ and `JSON Schema Core Draft 2020-12 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core.html>`__ standards.
```

**REQUIRED keys**

- :field:`type`: String or List.
  The string or list specifies the type of the defined property.
  It MUST be one of:

  - One of the strings :val:`"boolean"`, :val:`"object"` (refers to an OPTIMADE dictionary), :val:`"array"` (refers to an OPTIMADE list), :val:`"number"` (refers to an OPTIMADE float), :val:`"string"`, or :val:`"integer"`.
  - A list where the first item MUST be one of the strings above, and the second item MUST be the string :val:`"null"`.

> ..

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

Author: I think this needs to be here as part of the rst-formatting to make the following segment a "block quote" (which we use for things like implementation notes) and not be interpreted as part of the foregoing list.

Reviewer 5: Ah, right. Shouldn't it then `..` stay on the same line as the first line of the block quote then? I must admit I am quite inexperienced with RST.

Author: No, it is at zero indentation to explicitly terminate the preceding construct; see:

https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#empty-comments

  Implementation notes:

    - The strings used in the :field:`type` field are JSON type names encoded as strings, but they refer to the corresponding OPTIMADE data types.

>       Nevertheless, for consistency across formats, the JSON type names MUST be used regardless of the standard type names of the output format.

Reviewer 3: This makes JSON a special output format, and all others possibly more tricky to implement. If they have schema languages incompatible with JSON, this will become a contradictory requirement.

Author: > This makes [...] all other[ output format] possibly more tricky to implement [than JSON]

This is true. However, the way I see it, this is not caused by our Property Definition format making it particularly difficult to derive schemas for other output format, but because it is designed to make it particularly easy to specifically get JSON schemas. I still think this is better to adopt an existing schema format than coming up with our completely own design. And, if we adopt an existing schema format - what would make more sense than the schema format for our default output format?

> If they have schema languages incompatible with JSON, this will become a contradictory requirement.

It is not clear to me what you mean by this. The XML schema language is, in a way, "incompatible with JSON", but if you look at our JSON schema-derived Property Definition as just an abstract definition format, I don't see why you wouldn't be able to translate a Property Definition into an appropriate XML schema.

      The motivation for this design decision is that it makes the JSON representation of a Property Definition a fully valid standard JSON Schema.

    - The allowed values of the :field:`type` field are highly restricted compared to what is permitted using the full JSON Schema standard.
      Values can only be defined to be a single OPTIMADE data type or, optionally, :val:`null`.
      This restriction is intended to reduce the complexity of possible data types that implementations have to handle in different formats and database backends.

**OPTIONAL keys**

- :field:`title`: String.

>   A short single-line human-readable name for the defined property appropriate to show as part of a user interface.

Author: I'd like to avoid "description" specifically, since there is another field for precisely that. How about "explanation"? I'm editing your comment to do that insert, but if you disagree - complain in this thread.

    (Or, if the :field:`type` field is the list "object" and "null", it can also be :val:`null`).

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`required`: List.
    The list MUST only contain strings.
    The defined property MUST have keys that match all the strings in this list.
    Other keys present in the :field:`properties` field are OPTIONAL in the defined property.
    If not present or empty, all keys in :field:`properties` are regarded as OPTIONAL.

  - :field:`maxProperties`: Integer.
    The defined property is a dictionary where the number of keys MUST be less than or equal to the number given.

  - :field:`minProperties`: Integer.
    The defined property is a dictionary where the number of keys MUST be greater than or equal to the number given.

  - :field:`dependentRequired`: Dictionary.
    The dictionary keys are strings and the values are lists of unique strings.
    If the defined property has a key that is equal to a key in the given dictionary, the defined property MUST also have keys that matches each of the corresponding values.
    No restriction is inferred from this field for keys in the defined property that do not match any key in the given dictionary.

> - "array":

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- :val:`"array"`:
```

    The defined property is an array that MUST contain a number of items that is greater than or equal to the given integer.

  - :field:`uniqueItems`: Boolean.
    If :val:`TRUE`, the defined property is an array that MUST only contain unique items.
    If :val:`FALSE`, this field sets no limitation on the defined property.

- "integer":

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`multipleOf`: Integer.
    An integer is strictly greater than 0.
    The defined property MUST have an integer value that when divided by the given integer results in an integer (i.e., it must be even divisible by this integer without a fractional part).

  - :field:`maximum`: Integer.
    The defined property is an integer that MUST be less than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMaximum`: Integer.
    The defined property is an integer that MUST be strictly less than this number; it cannot equal the number.

  - :field:`minimum`: Integer.
    The defined property is an integer that MUST be greater than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMinimum`: Integer.
    The defined property is an integer that MUST be strictly greater than this number; it cannot equal the number.

> - "number":

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- :val:`"number"`:
```

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`multipleOf`: Float.
    An integer is strictly greater than 0.
    The defined property MUST have an integer value that when divided by the given integer results in an integer (i.e., it must be even divisible by this integer without a fractional part).

  - :field:`maximum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be less than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMaximum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be strictly less than this number; it cannot equal the number.

  - :field:`minimum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be greater than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMinimum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be strictly greater than this number; it cannot equal the number.

- "string":

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`maxLength`: Integer.
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.

>     The length of the string is defined according to :RFC:`8259`.

Author: After closer inspection, this made its way into the PR because the original JSON schema refers to this, but their reference is (a bit unclearly) to what a "character" is in JSON. However, we cannot really use the same thing here, because this text isn't JSON-specific. We need to refer to what an "OPTIMADE character of a string" is. I've replaced the reference to RFC 8259 a minor definition of length.

  - :field:`minLength`: Integer.
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
    The length of the string is defined according to :RFC:`8259`.

>   - :field:`format`: String.

Reviewer 5: Production names in this subsection need special typesetting to separate them from the rest of the text.

Author: (I assume you suggested the specific changes you refer to here, which are now merged.)

    Choose one of the following values to indicate that the defined property is a string that MUST adhere to the specified format:

>     - "date-time": the date-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`"date-time"`: the date-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
```

>     - "date": the full-date production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`"date"`: the full-date production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
```

>     - "time": the full-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`"time"`: the full-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
```

>     - "duration": the duration production in :RFC:`3339` Appendix A.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`"duration"`: the duration production in :RFC:`3339` Appendix A.
```

>     - "email": the "Mailbox" ABNF rule in :RFC:`5321` section 4.1.2.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`"email"`: the "Mailbox" ABNF rule in :RFC:`5321` section 4.1.2.
```

>     - "uri": A string instance is valid against this attribute if it is a valid URI, according to :RFC:`3986`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - :val:`"uri"`: A string instance is valid against this attribute if it is a valid URI, according to :RFC:`3986`.
```

Physical Units in Property Definitions
--------------------------------------

In OPTIMADE, there is no facility to allow a property to be represented in a choice of units, e.g., either ångström (Å) or meters.
The unit is always permanently fixed by the Property Definition.
Clients and servers that use other units internally thus have to do unit conversions as part of preparing and processing OPTIMADE responses.

The physical unit of a property, the embedded items of a list, or values of a dictionary, are defined with the field :field:`x-optimade-unit` with the following requirements:

- The field MUST be given with a non-:val:`null` value both at the highest level in the OPTIMADE Property Definition and all inner Property Definitions.

> - If the property refers to a physical quantity that is dimensionless (often also refered to as having the dimension 1) or refers to a dimensionless count of something (e.g., the number of protons in a nucleus) the field MUST have the value :val:`dimensionless`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If the property refers to a physical quantity that is dimensionless (often also referred to as having the dimension 1) or refers to a dimensionless count of something (e.g., the number of protons in a nucleus) the field MUST have the value :val:`dimensionless`.
```

> - If the the property refers to an entity for which the assignment of a unit would not make sense, e.g., a string representing a chemical formula or a serial number the field MUST have the value :val:`inapplicable`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If the property refers to an entity for which the assignment of a unit would not make sense, e.g., a string representing a chemical formula or a serial number the field MUST have the value :val:`inapplicable`.
```

> A standard set of unit symbols for OPTIMADE is taken from version 3.09 unit database :val:`definition.units` from `GNU Units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__ located in the file: "definitions.units" in `the GNU Units source distribution version 2.21 <http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/units/>`__.

Reviewer 5: Is there a reason why two versions on this line differ? Is the `definition.units` file versioned separately from the rest GNU Units package?

Author: Yes. Isn't that clear? Can it be made more clear?

Reviewer 5: It is a bit unclear, yes. Can we just add "Note the "definitions.units" file is versioned separately from GNU Units distributions."?

> If the unit is available in this database, or if it can be expressed as a compound unit expression using these units, the value of :field:`x-optimade-unit` SHOULD use the corresponding (compound) string symbol and a corresponding definition refering to the same symbol be given in the field :field:`standard`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the unit is available in this database, or if it can be expressed as a compound unit expression using these units, the value of :field:`x-optimade-unit` SHOULD use the corresponding (compound) string symbol and a corresponding definition referring to the same symbol be given in the field :field:`standard`.
```

> If the unit is available in this database, or if it can be expressed as a compound unit expression using these units, the value of :field:`x-optimade-unit` SHOULD use the corresponding (compound) string symbol and a corresponding definition refering to the same symbol be given in the field :field:`standard`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If the unit is available in this database, or if it can be expressed as a compound unit expression using these units, the value of :field:`x-optimade-unit` SHOULD use the corresponding (compound) string symbol and a corresponding definition referring to the same symbol be given in the field :field:`standard`.
```

A compound unit expression based on the GNU Units symbols is created by a sequence of unit symbols separated by a single multiplication :val:`*` symbol.
Each unit symbol can also be suffixed by a single :val:`^` symbol followed by a positive or negative integer to indicate the power of the preceding unit, e.g., :val:`m^3` for cubic meter, :val:`m^-3` for inverse cubic meter.

> (Positive integers MUST NOT be preceeded by a plus sign.)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(Positive integers MUST NOT be preceded by a plus sign.)
```

> The unit symbols can also be prefixed by one (but not more than one) of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by a trailing :val:`-`).

Reviewer 5: The example with `km` is really an appropriate one. However, only from the example it is clear that trailing `-` have to be removed from the prefixes.

> The unit symbols can also be prefixed by one (but not more than one) of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by a trailing :val:`-`).

Author: I've added a clarification about this. However, upon doing so I realized that it is no clear if/how our attempts at normalization influences the prefixes; so, I've added a note about that as well.

> The unit symbols can also be prefixed by one (but not more than one) of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by a trailing :val:`-`).

Reviewer 5: Thanks, I am fine with the new addition.

Furthermore:

- No whitespace, parenthesis, or other symbols than specified above are permitted.

> - If multiple string representations of the same unit exist in `definition.units`, the *first one* in that file consisting of only lowercase letters a-z and underscores, but no other symbols, SHOULD be used.

Author: definitions.units references a filename, it isn't formally a value... I'm not sure how to properly tag this. Either it shouldn't be a literal, or it should be a true literal (double '). I'll edit your suggestion to do the latter.

- The unit symbols MUST appear in alphabetical order.

The string in :field:`x-optimade-unit` MUST be defined in the :field:`unit-definitions` field inside the :field:`x-optimade-property` field in the outermost level of the Property Definition.

If provided, the :field:`unit-definitions` in :field:`x-optimade-property` MUST be a list of dictionaries, all adhering to the following format:

**REQUIRED keys:**

- :field:`symbol`: String.
  Specifies the symbol to be used in :field:`x-optimade-unit` to reference this unit.

- :field:`title`: String.
  A human-readable single-line string name for the unit.

- :field:`description`: String.
  A human-readable multiple-line detailed description of the unit.

- :field:`standard`: Dictionary.
  This field is used to define the unit symbol using a preexisting standard.
  The dictionary has the following format:

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`name`: String.
    The abbreviated name of the standard being referenced.
    One of the following:

>     - :val:`"gnu units"`: the symbol is a (compound) unit expression based on the symbols in the file definitions.units distributed with GNU Units `GNU Units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__, created according to the scheme described above.

Author: (At the very least we should be consistent... So I edit this as well to be a true literal)

    - :val:`"ucum"`: the symbol comes from `The Unified Code for Units of Measure <https://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum.html>`__ (UCUM) standard.
    - :val:`"qudt"`: the symbol comes from the `QUDT <http://qudt.org/>`__ standard.
      Not only symbols strictly defined within the standard are allowed, but also other compound unit expressions created according to the scheme for how new such symbols are formed in this standard.

  - :field:`version`: String.
    The version string of the referenced standard.

  - :field:`symbol`: String.
    The symbol to use from the referenced standard, expressed according to that standard.
    This field MAY be different from :field:`symbol` directly under :field:`unit-definitions`, meaning that the unit is referenced in :field:`x-optimade-unit` fields using a different symbol than the one used in the standard.
    However, the :field:`symbol` fields SHOULD be the same unless multiple units sharing the same symbol need to be referenced.

**OPTIONAL keys:**

- :field:`resource-uris`: List.

>   A list of dictionaries that references remote resources that describe the unit.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  A list of dictionaries that reference remote resources that describe the unit.
```

  The format of each dictionary is:

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`relation`: String.
    A human-readable description of the relationship between the unit and the remote resource, e.g., a "natural language description".

  - :field:`uri`: String.
    A URI of the external resource (which MAY be a resolvable URL).

Unrecognized keys in property definitions
-----------------------------------------

> Implementations MAY add their own keys in Property Definitions, both inside and outside of the fields :field:`x-optimade-property`, :field:`x-optimade-implementation`, and :field:`x-optimade-requirements` on the form :field:`x-exmpl-name` where :field:`exmpl` is the database-specific prefix (without underscore characters) and :field:`name` is the part of the key chosen by the implementation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Implementations MAY add their own keys in Property Definitions, both inside and outside of the fields :field:`x-optimade-property`, :field:`x-optimade-implementation`, and :field:`x-optimade-requirements` in the form of :field:`x-exmpl-name` where :field:`exmpl` is the database-specific prefix (without underscore characters) and :field:`name` is the part of the key chosen by the implementation.
```

Some features of the filtering language are marked OPTIONAL.
An implementation that encounters an OPTIONAL feature that it does not support MUST respond with error ``501 Not Implemented`` with an explanation of which OPTIONAL construct the error refers to.

Property Definitions
====================

An OPTIMADE *Property Definition* defines a specific property, which will be referred to as *the defined property* throughout this section.
The definition uses a dictionary-based construct that, when represented in the JSON output format, is compatible with the JSON Schema standard (for more information, see `Property Definition keys from JSON Schema`_).
The format of Property Definitions defined below allows nesting inner Property Definitions to define properties that are comprised by values organized in lists and dictionaries to arbitrary depth.

> The field data types used in this section refer to OPTIMADE data types, and the implementation maps these to the corresponding data types for the output format in which the property definition is expressed.

Author: ```suggestion
To make a property definition expressible in any output format, the fields of the property definition below are specified using OPTIMADE data types.
When a property definition is communicated using a specific data format (e.g., JSON), the property definition is implemented in that data format by mapping the OPTIMADE data types into the corresponding data types for that output format.
```

> The field data types used in this section refer to OPTIMADE data types, and the implementation maps these to the corresponding data types for the output format in which the property definition is expressed.
> 

Author: The following was suggested by @sauliusg (but cannot be commited directly from his suggestion as it for some reason has been deemed "outdated" by the edit history)
```suggestion
The field data types used to describe properties in this section refers to OPTIMADE data types, and the implementation maps these to the corresponding data types for the output format used for the `info` end point, in which the property definition is expressed. Currently they are mapped to JSON types as they are used in the JSON API. 
```

Author: @sauliusg 
- First edit -> "to describe properties" I'm fully with you on.
- Second edit: used for the `info` end point: the mapping is not only there, the mapping happens primarily when these property definitions are translated to describe any arbitrary output format for any given endpoint (e.g., structures)
- Third edit: "Currently they are apped to JSON types as they are used in the JSON API." - no... the section uses OPTIMADE types when describing the types of the fields in a property definition. JSON type names are used only as part of the definition of the "type" field, nowhere else.

  - :field:`query-support-operators`: List of Strings.
    Defines the filter language features supported on this property.
    Each string in the list MUST be one of :val:`<`, :val:`<=`, :val:`>`, :val:`>=`, :val:`=`, :val:`!=`, :val:`CONTAINS`, :val:`STARTS WITH`, :val:`ENDS WITH`:, :val:`HAS`, :val:`HAS ALL`, :val:`HAS ANY`, :val:`HAS ONLY`, :val:`IS KNOWN`, :val:`IS UNKNOWN` with the following meanings:

    - :val:`<`, :val:`<=`, :val:`>`, :val:`>=`, :val:`=`, :val:`!=`: indicating support for filtering this property using the respective operator.
      If the property is of Boolean type, support for :val:`=` also designates support for boolean comparisons with the property being true that omit ":filter-fragment:`= TRUE`", e.g., specifying that filtering for ":filter:`is_yellow = TRUE`" is supported also implies support for ":filter:`is_yellow`" (which means the same thing).
      Support for ":filter:`NOT is_yellow`" also follows.

    - :val:`CONTAINS`, :val:`STARTS WITH`, :val:`ENDS WITH`: indicating support for substring filtering of this property using the respective operator. MUST NOT appear if the property is not of type String.

>     - :val:`HAS`, :val:`HAS ALL`, :val:`HAS ANY`: indicating support for the MANDATORY features for list property comparison using the respective operator. MUST NOT appear if the property is not of type List.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - :val:`HAS`, :val:`HAS ALL`, :val:`HAS ANY`: indicating support of the MANDATORY features for list property comparison using the respective operator. MUST NOT appear if the property is not of type List.
```

  - A list where the first item MUST be one of the strings above, and the second item MUST be the string :val:`"null"`.

..

  Implementation notes:

    - The strings used in the :field:`type` field are JSON type names encoded as strings, but they refer to the corresponding OPTIMADE data types.
      Nevertheless, for consistency across formats, the JSON type names MUST be used regardless of the standard type names of the output format.
      The motivation for this design decision is that it makes the JSON representation of a Property Definition a fully valid standard JSON Schema.

    - The allowed values of the :field:`type` field are highly restricted compared to what is permitted using the full JSON Schema standard.
      Values can only be defined to be a single OPTIMADE data type or, optionally, :val:`null`.
      This restriction is intended to reduce the complexity of possible data types that implementations have to handle in different formats and database backends.

**OPTIONAL keys**

- :field:`title`: String.

>   A short single-line human-readable explanation for the defined property appropriate to show as part of a user interface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  A short single-line human-readable explanation of the defined property appropriate to show as part of a user interface.
```

  - :field:`minimum`: Integer.
    The defined property is an integer that MUST be greater than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMinimum`: Integer.
    The defined property is an integer that MUST be strictly greater than this number; it cannot equal the number.

- "number":

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`multipleOf`: Float.
    An integer is strictly greater than 0.
    The defined property MUST have an integer value that when divided by the given integer results in an integer (i.e., it must be even divisible by this integer without a fractional part).

  - :field:`maximum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be less than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMaximum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be strictly less than this number; it cannot equal the number.

  - :field:`minimum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be greater than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMinimum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be strictly greater than this number; it cannot equal the number.

- "string":

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`maxLength`: Integer.

>     A non-negative integer.
>     The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
>     The length of the string is defined according to :RFC:`8259`.

Author: ```suggestion
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer. (The length of the string is the number of individual characters it is composed from.)
```

>   - :field:`minLength`: Integer.
>     A non-negative integer.
>     The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
>     The length of the string is defined according to :RFC:`8259`.

Author: ```suggestion
  - :field:`minLength`: Integer.
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
```

>     The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer. (The length of the string is the number of individual characters it is composed from.)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
    (The length of the string is the number of individual characters it is composed from.)
```

>     The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer. (The length of the string is the number of individual characters it is composed from.)

Reviewer 4: Is the new explanation of the string length unambiguous when used with Unicode? It really depends on how we define a character and on which Unicode normalization form in used (e.g., does "ṻ" which consists of the base character "u", a macron and a diaeresis count as 1, 2 or 3 characters?).

Author: I suppose that is what the link in JSON Schema to RFC8259 was meant to clarify, but quickly flipping through that RFC, I'm not sure there is more of a clarification than "number of unicode characters". But I think that means your symbol counts as three unicode characters (?). Hmm... I think we should also add "unicode" to our text.

Author: Using google for clarification, I note that we are not the only ones confused how to actually read the JSON schema specification: https://stackoverflow.com/a/20791787/1558655 - note particularly the final comment.

However, the JSON API specification says "the number of Unicode characters" and, referencing Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Unicode_characters it seems Diaeresis and Macron modifiers count as "characters".

In any case, in this ambiguity we probably should stay as close as possible to the JSON Schema phrasing so that it is clear that we mean the same thing they mean, whatever that is.

>     The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we could note here that the string length is calculated in the same way as detailed in the description of the `maxLength` field? I understand that there are drawbacks to the previous approach where the same string length definition was repeated verbatim in both descriptions, but omitting it completely is also not very intuitive.

>     The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.

Author: ```suggestion
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
    (The definition of the length of a string is the same as in the field :field:`maxLength`.)
```

A standard set of unit symbols for OPTIMADE is taken from version 3.09 unit database :val:`definition.units` from `GNU Units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__ located in the file: "definitions.units" in `the GNU Units source distribution version 2.21 <http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/units/>`__.
If the unit is available in this database, or if it can be expressed as a compound unit expression using these units, the value of :field:`x-optimade-unit` SHOULD use the corresponding (compound) string symbol and a corresponding definition refering to the same symbol be given in the field :field:`standard`.

A compound unit expression based on the GNU Units symbols is created by a sequence of unit symbols separated by a single multiplication :val:`*` symbol.
Each unit symbol can also be suffixed by a single :val:`^` symbol followed by a positive or negative integer to indicate the power of the preceding unit, e.g., :val:`m^3` for cubic meter, :val:`m^-3` for inverse cubic meter.
(Positive integers MUST NOT be preceeded by a plus sign.)

> The unit symbols can also be prefixed by one (but not more than one) of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by a trailing :val:`-`).

Author: ```suggestion
The unit symbols can also be prefixed by one (but not more than one) of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by a trailing :val:`-`).
For example :val:`"km"` for kilometers.
```

- :val:`"string"`:

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`maxLength`: Integer.
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
    (The length of the string is the number of individual Unicode characters it is composed from.)

  - :field:`minLength`: Integer.
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
    (The definition of the length of a string is the same as in the field :field:`maxLength`.)

  - :field:`format`: String.
    Choose one of the following values to indicate that the defined property is a string that MUST adhere to the specified format:

    - :val:`"date-time"`: the date-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
    - :val:`"date"`: the full-date production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
    - :val:`"time"`: the full-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
    - :val:`"duration"`: the duration production in :RFC:`3339` Appendix A.
    - :val:`"email"`: the "Mailbox" ABNF rule in :RFC:`5321` section 4.1.2.

>     - :val:`"uri"`: A string instance is valid against this attribute if it is a valid URI, according to :RFC:`3986`.

Author: ```suggestion
    - :val:`"uri"`: a string instance is valid against this attribute if it is a valid URI, according to :RFC:`3986`.
```

--------------------------------------

In OPTIMADE, there is no facility to allow a property to be represented in a choice of units, e.g., either ångström (Å) or meter (m).
The unit is always permanently fixed by the Property Definition.
Clients and servers that use other units internally thus have to do unit conversions as part of preparing and processing OPTIMADE responses.

The physical unit of a property, the embedded items of a list, or values of a dictionary, are defined with the field :field:`x-optimade-unit` with the following requirements:

- The field MUST be given with a non-:val:`null` value both at the highest level in the OPTIMADE Property Definition and all inner Property Definitions.
- If the property refers to a physical quantity that is dimensionless (often also referred to as having the dimension 1) or refers to a dimensionless count of something (e.g., the number of protons in a nucleus) the field MUST have the value :val:`dimensionless`.
- If the property refers to an entity for which the assignment of a unit would not make sense, e.g., a string representing a chemical formula or a serial number the field MUST have the value :val:`inapplicable`.

> A standard set of unit symbols for OPTIMADE is taken from version 3.09 unit database :val:`definition.units` from `GNU Units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__ located in the file "definitions.units" in `the GNU Units source distribution version 2.21 <http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/units/>`__.

Author: ```suggestion
A standard set of unit symbols for OPTIMADE is taken from version 3.09 of the (separately versioned) unit database :val:`definition.units` from `GNU Units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__ that is included in `the GNU Units source distribution version 2.21 <http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/units/>`__.
```

Reviewer 5: Sounds better now.

    The defined property is an integer that MUST be strictly greater than this number; it cannot be equal to the number.

- :val:`"number"`:

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`multipleOf`: Float.
    An integer is strictly greater than 0.
    The defined property MUST have an integer value that when divided by the given integer results in an integer (i.e., it must be even divisible by this integer without a fractional part).

  - :field:`maximum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be less than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMaximum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be strictly less than this number; it cannot be equal to the number.

  - :field:`minimum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be greater than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMinimum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be strictly greater than this number; it cannot be equal to the number.

- :val:`"string"`:

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`maxLength`: Integer.
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.

>     (The length of the string is the number of individual Unicode characters it is composed from.)

Reviewer 4: `Individual Unicode characters` is probably also not sufficient, since what is considered an individual character depends on the [Unicode normalization form](https://unicode.org/reports/tr15/)  that is used to represent the string. For example, letter "ž" (as in "Gražulis"), can be represented both as a single codepoint U+017E ("Latin Small Letter Z with Caron") under the NFC normalization and as a combination of two codepoints U+007A, U+030C ("Latin Small Letter Z" and "Combining Caron") under the NFD normalization.

[RFC 4329](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4329) that covers the JavaScript and ECMAScript media types contains the following lines that show preference to the NFC normalization:

> Source text is expected to be in Unicode Normalization Form C. Scripts and implementations MUST consider security implications of unnormalized source text and data.

However, neither RFC 8259 (JSON), nor the JSON Schema specification are explicit about this, although these seems to be at least one similar string-length related issue raise in the JSON Schema repo (https://github.com/json-schema-org/json-schema-spec/issues/215). Also, note that Unicode string normalization is relevant not only when determining the length of the string, but also when comparing two strings for equality, etc. so it might be useful to eventually define this more explicitly in other contexts as well. For now, maybe something like this could work?

> The length of the string is the number of individual Unicode characters the string consists of when presented in the Unicode Normalization Form C.

I am not necessarily advocating for Normalization Form C, but rather using it as a reasonable placeholder.

Author: > For now, maybe something like this could work?
> 
> > The length of the string is the number of individual Unicode characters the string consists of when presented in the Unicode Normalization Form C.
> 
> I am not necessarily advocating for Normalization Form C, but rather using it as a reasonable placeholder.

I don't see how it is an option for us to be less ambiguous than the standard we aim to be compatible with. If we clarify in this direction and JSON Schema ends up going in a different direction, the compatibility is broken. I think the right course of action at this point is to adopt the unclear formulation from the current JSON Schema draft standard and - if someone of us is prepared to do it - contact them and ask them to clarify.

Author: (@vaitkus if you are ok with the present situation, please do an actual review ("File changed" -> top right "Review changes" and "Approve", so we get the approvals to merge; thanks.)

Reviewer 5: @vaitkus might not be among the "owners" of the repository, thus his approval might not be included in the count.

Reviewer 4: > I don't see how it is an option for us to be less ambiguous than the standard we aim to be compatible with. If we clarify in this direction and JSON Schema ends up going in a different direction, the compatibility is broken. I think the right course of action at this point is to adopt the unclear formulation from the current JSON Schema draft standard and - if someone of us is prepared to do it - contact them and ask them to clarify.

I do not think that being less ambiguous makes us incompatible -- schema representation remains the same, but we simply explicitly clarify how we interpret "string length" in the scope of the OPTIMADE project. Without a uniform definition, different implementation of the validator are open to return different (conflicting) results.

Also, I think that eventual incompatibility with the JSON Schema is somewhat inevitable. Property definitions are currently based on a fixed JSON Schema version and once a new JSON Schema version is released (currently only ~30% complete), a conscious decision will have to be made to migrate to it taking into account all the potential incompatibilities.

As for the actual review, I though that I actually went through the approval steps that you described. It might be the ownership issue that @merkys mentioned, but I will try again just in case.

Author: @vaitkus 

> Also, I think that eventual incompatibility with the JSON Schema is somewhat inevitable. Property definitions are currently based on a fixed JSON Schema version and once a new JSON Schema version is released (currently only ~30% complete), a conscious decision will have to be made to migrate to it taking into account all the potential incompatibilities.

Is it naive to hope that future revisions of JSON Schema will keep our rather small subset intact to remain backwards compatible? But you have a very good point here: how can we avoid breaking clients if JSON Schema makes a backwards-incompatible change. We probably should add a machine-readable reference to the JSON Schema version somewhere in this. Perhaps in x-optiomade-property in the outermost property definition? Can we be sure at least that much will remain intact?

Reviewer 4: That would be a useful property. The JSON Schema people seem to properly version their releases and even provide in-depth descriptions on how the new version differs from the previous one (e.g., https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/release-notes.html).

Author: I'll try to draft a PR for this.

    #BEGIN ERE strings
    "([^\"]|\\.)*"
    #END ERE strings

> Property Definitions

Reviewer: I think the "Property Definitions" part could be moved to 5.5.2 because of its importance. If we do not want to change the "optimade types" then the map between the optimade types and JSON types could stay in the appendix.
The "Physical Units in Property Definitions" part could also stay in the appendix.

Author: Note: I leave this open to represent that we will eventually move the Property Definitions to a new main section between sections 5 and 6. (But I won't do that yet to not obscure other changes).

Author: The appendix is now a main text section instead.

--------------------

An OPTIMADE *Property Definition* defines a specific property, which will be referred to as *the defined property* throughout this appendix.
The property definition uses a dictionary-based construct that strictly follows a subset of the `JSON Schema Validation Draft 2020-12 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation.html>`__ and `JSON Schema Core Draft 2020-12 <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core.html>`__ standards.
While these standards are JSON-based, the dictionary construct can be realized in any format capable of representing the basic OPTIMADE data types. Hence, the field definitions below are given in terms of OPTIMADE data types, and the implementation maps these to the corresponding data types for the output format in which the property definition is expressed.

Property definitions that define properties that are lists or dictionaries contain one or more nested *Inner Property Definition* to define the items and values of those constructs.

A Property Definition is a dictionary that has the following format:

> **REQUIRED keys for non-Inner Property Definitions:**

Reviewer: I think the non-Inner Inner property separation is a little bit confusing and unnecessary. Later all possible/optional properties will be explained anyway.

- :field:`title`: String.
  A short single-line human-readable name for the defined property appropriate to show as part of a user interface.

- :field:`description`: String.
  A human-readable multi-line description that explains the purpose, requirements, and conventions of the defined property.
  The format SHOULD be a one-line description, followed by a new paragraph (two newlines), followed by a more detailed description of all the requirements and conventions of the defined property.

>   Formatting in the text SHOULD use Markdown in the `CommonMark v0.3 format <https://spec.commonmark.org/0.30/>`__.

Reviewer: It is also worth mentioning that you should escape the " (quote) symbol. 
```
The following characters are reserved in JSON and must be properly escaped to be used in strings:
Newline is replaced with \n
Tab is replaced with \t
Double quote is replaced with \"
Backslash is replaced with \\
```

Author: I'm confused here - you want us to specify the JSON quoting rules in the definition of the `description` field? Why? Doesn't the requirement to escape the double quote apply likewise to any string field communicated in JSON?

Reviewer: It is just a minor technical note: If we say the text SHOULD be Markdown then to store it as a JSON string you might need to do a "double" escape. This might be necessary because `"` and `\"` is also allowed in Markdown so you need to store it as `\"` and `\\\" in the JSON string as similarly defined in "6.1 Lexical tokens". I do not want to redefine JSON quoting rules and if you think it is obvious that all Markdown needs to be converted into JSON string then please feel free to resolve it.

Reviewer 2: I think 6.1 only applies to the filters. 
As I think these escapes also apply to other strings, it may be better to specify this in section 4.2 which describes the JSON response. In that case it can also be placed in a separate PR as the discussion on this one is already very long.

- :field:`x-optimade-definition`: Dictionary.
  A dictionary of OPTIMADE-specific information about the defined property (i.e., the JSON Schema standard does not define these fields).
  The dictionary has the following format:

  **REQUIRED keys:**

>   - :field:`version`: String.

Reviewer: I think "version" should not be required. The "property-uri" field should be used as a unique identification that could contain version information if needed. It is not clear that what version means at all for the "database-specific" data.

Author: I'm not sure I understand 'for the "database-specific" data. It is meant to be the version of the property definition. So, if you update the property definition, you bump the version. If we don't require this version string, and instead rely on the uri for versioning, should the uri be required?

Reviewer: I think my confusion here is that I thought that every property could have a `x-optimade-definition` field so every property has its own "version", "property-uri", "support", "sortable" etc not only the "most outer ones"

In the case of nested database-specific property like this:
```
_exampl_DFT_parameteres: {
  cutoff_energy: "30"
}
```
I don't see how can define eg the unit of the cutoff_energy with `x-optimade-definition` only at the most outer layer. I think it would be nicer to follow the JSON schema definition and allow to use `x-optimade-definition` at any level.

I think uri should not be required only optional. In this way, the database implementers have to opportunity to gradually add more (meta)information to their data. 

If it is not defined simply means that there is no "unique id" so it is not "comparable" to any other value.

Of course, I am sure that all the optimade specific ones will have their uri it is more about ....

Author: Workshop resolution: Version is no longer required, but rather a URI. Version remains but is OPTIONAL

    This string indicates the version of the property definition.
    The string SHOULD be in the format described by the `semantic versioning v2 <https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html>` standard.

  **OPTIONAL keys:**

  - :field:`property-uri`: String.

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Reviewer: As far as remember the idea here was that you can have a reference to a property definition. If you copy and paste here you could have a working property definition so this is why only JSON format makes any sense here.

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Reviewer: My suggestion was that we could use the URI as a unique identifier (which could contain version definition). It can also be used when you want to compare values from different databases if their URI is the same or you can use this URI to build a "knowledge graph" between databases etc.
The main reason to "repeat" everything in the info endpoint is to make sure that everything is "self-contained" so everything stays "understandable" even the server where the URI point is down.

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Author: I don't think only JSON makes sense here; the format isn't otherwise tied to JSON, and I like the idea to not enforce JSON for the `property-uri`. But, we have so far tried to stay away from relying on HTTP headers for things like this, e.g., we have a `response_format` URL parameter instead of using the Accept header, and there are some good reasons for that.

Perhaps it would make the most sense to say that the uri needs to return the same format that the response itself is in, but I also don't like that based on that an implementation shouldn't need to keep track on what the transport format was.

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Reviewer: I'm sorry but I think I misunderstood this field. Are we talking about URI or URL? URI is not necessary an URL it can also be something like: `orptimade-property:latticevector/1.2.3` or `tel: 00334455` or `https://example.com`.

As far as I remember during the discussions we just mentioned URL and JSON response for simplicity but
URI is more than that ...

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Reviewer 6: Maybe I am also misunderstanding; is the intention here that this URI will always point to an internal or centralised OPTIMADE source, and not e.g. EMMO's definition of "band gap"? 

Looking further down I guess I am thinking more of the intention of `resource-uris`, where the relation is something like a `"isExactMatch"`.

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Author: The idea is that this URI (or URL, see discussion below) returns the property definition itself, with exactly the same information that is already given inline in the response. It thus cannot point to the EMMO's definition of "band gap" since it isn't served by them in this format (that would be `resource-uris`.) It can however point at a URL served by OPTIMADE, or a URL served by an external entity that, e.g., two different databases point at for the definition - making it clear that these two databases are talking about the exact same thing.

I only ever envision URLs being used in these fields, and I'm happy to rename them "-url" rather than "-uri". Nevertheless, all URLs are URIs, so it isn't limiting to technically allow any URI.

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Reviewer: I think URI is perfect even if we say that only an URL is allowed right now. Later it can be more without breaking anything. 

I also think using URI as a unique identifier only works if each property has one including the nested/structured properties as well (more about this later). 
I think it is more common to compare properties from different databases rather than databases themself.

In my thinking, I think about properties as metadata's of the data and the URI's are the unique id of the property. This is different than the resource-uris where you use external ids to link two thing together.

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Author: My conclusion of this discussion is that we are undecided on @ml-evs suggestion.

We do specify that the response format for some of our endpoints MUST follow JSON API, meaning that they have to be in JSON, so IMO it isn't outlandish to hard-specify that also the property-uri here points to something that MUST be JSON-formatted.

The argument against the proposal (apart from added complexity) is: do we want this functionality to be the first place in the specification where we start relying on HTTP headers?

>     A URI that SHOULD resolve to a JSON response that contains the present Property Definition.

Reviewer 6: > The idea is that this URI (or URL, see discussion below) returns the property definition itself, with exactly the same information that is already given inline in the response. It thus cannot point to the EMMO's definition of "band gap" since it isn't served by them in this format (that would be `resource-uris`.)

This answers my concern, I was confusing this field with `resource-uris` - I should have commented and resolve the issue here, apologies!

    The format of the response MUST be that of an `OPTIMADE Entry Listing Info Endpoint <Entry Listing Info Endpoints>`_, except the only mandatory keys are :field:`data` with the subfield :field:`properties`, but the response MAY contain other fields.
    This format makes it possible for a Property Definition in an Entry Listing Info endpoint to set :field:`x-optimade-property-uri` as a link back to the same Info endpoint.
    However, the field MAY also link to a resource external from the implementation to clarify to clients that a property used in several databases represents the same thing.

>   - :field:`support`: String

Reviewer: It might be worth considering removing "support", "query" and "sortable" fields. I think a try-catch method would be much more efficient and less confusing. All the client implementation already catching all the exceptions. This is not part of the definition but rather the "way" how you can use the API query functionality. 

PS: In the end, I think it is just easier to ignore these fields and trying to do the query. If there is any problem a proper I will get an "error" response anyway.

Reviewer 2: The support field also seems unnecessary to me in its present form.
Either the implementation has the property or it does not have the property. And if it does not have the property, I would expect that there is no field for it in the info endpoint.

I, however, think that relying on error messages to pass the information about whether a property is queryable or sortable is rather ugly. It would also take multiple queries to figure out which types of queries are and which are not supported.
So I would opt to keep the query and sortable fields.

Author: These property definitions are going to be distributed by us, and others, to standardize properties. They are meant to cover the same information that we presently distribute in only-human-readable-form in Section 7 Entry list, but now in computer-readable form. I think a standard format for this have great benefits for the future evolvement of the standard.

I agree that you can feel free to leave out the `support` field in the response from your database - it is OPTIONAL, after all - but you want that field to be there if you are trying to coordinate a set of OPTIMADE databases to be 'compatible' for the same type of queries. Then you can distribute a list of property definitions on this format and say that you are only compliant if you follow these. The ultimate version of that is the list of property definitions we distribute alongside the standard, which *everyone* needs to adhere to according to the `support` field.

    Note: the specification in this field of whether the defined property can be :val:`null` or not MUST match the value of the :field:`type` field outside of :field:`x-optimade-definition`.
    If :val:`null` values are allowed, that field must be a list where the string :val:`"null"` is the second element.

  - :field:`query`: String.
    The string MUST be one of the following:

    - :val:`"full"`: the defined property MUST be queryable using the OPTIMADE filter language with support for all mandatory filter features.
    - :val:`"partial:only full string"`: the defined property is a string that MUST be queryable using the OPTIMADE filter language. However, support for the partial string matching operators are OPTIONAL (i.e., the operators BEGINS WITH, ENDS WITH, and CONTAINS).
    - :val:`"partial"`: the defined property MUST be queryable, but the support MAY be restricted to any subset of the filter language operators and features.
      The level of support is described in the field :field:`query-description`.
    - :val:`"none"`: the defined property MAY not be queryable at all.

  - :field:`query-description`: String.

>     This string is a human-readable multi-line text that describes the limitations of support of the OPTIMADE filter language.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be better to have a list of all the types of queries that are supported.
Such a list could be interpreted automatically, whereas a custom description would need to be read by a human.

Author: The field `queryable` gives the machine-processable support definitions, this one is meant only when `queryable` is not sufficient and thus set to `partial` alongside a human-readable explanation in this field.

I just don't see how we could "list all the types of queries that are supported" given the expressibility of the query language. The restrictions may map to very non-obvious limitations of the underlying database engine. Can you provide an explicit example of the format you'd want for `queryable` and `queryable-description`?

Reviewer 2: Below, I have given an example of how I think you could implement it. The properties all correspond to the different types of queries in the specification in section 6.2. They are ordered in the order in which they occur in the specification.
There are quite a lot of fields, but many of them are only relevant for one of the field types, so you could specify you only need to give the fields relevant for the type of the property.
You could also argue that the mandatory fields do not need to be listed here since they MUST be implemented by every provider. 
The fields for “greater than”, “less or equal” etc. or all very similar so we could group them together in one field. 

`“queryability”:{
  “numeric_and_string_comparison”:{
    “lt”:TRUE,
    “gt”:TRUE,
    “le”:TRUE,
    “ge”:TRUE,
    “eq”:TRUE,
    “neq”:TRUE,
    “two_identifier_comparison”:TRUE,
    “two_constant_comparison”:FALSE,
  },
  “substring_comparison”:{
    “contains”:TRUE,
    “starts_with”:TRUE,		
    “ends_with”:TRUE,
    “identifier_as_string”:FALSE,
  },
  “list_comparisson”:{
    “has”: FALSE,
    “has_all”:FALSE,
    “has_any”:FALSE,
    “length”:FALSE,
    “has_only”:FALSE
    “correlated_positions”:FALSE
    “has_plus_operator”:FALSE
  },
  “max_nesting level”:2 ,  // avalue of -1 could indicate no nesting level. 
  “relationship_filtering”:TRUE,
  “is_known”:TRUE,
}`

Author: Right, this is another way to specify query support in a machine-readable format, which was meant to be handled by `queryable`. We *could* change that field into something like this, but is it not better that we define a few reasonable named support levels which are easier to work with on the client side?

The reason the present version of the PR also has a human-readable limitation field is to cover cases that cannot be foreseen. Lets say there is a database engine that for some reason makes it easy to represent substring comparisons, but only one comparison/substring comparison per string. This would be impossible to specify if we only go with a structure like the one you propose.

Reviewer 2: We could still have a `queryable-description` like field to describe database specific query options that are not in the OPTIMADE standard. 

The support levels that are in the current PR are not sufficient. 
A database may support more query options than those that are mandatory according to the OPTIMADE standard, yet there is no option to specify this. 
We would also have to specify which types of queries are included in each support level, as automated clients would have to know which types of queries are available for a property to make the most efficient queries. They can, however, not interpret the `queryable-description` field. 

Specifying the query options for each property would be the most flexible option. A database provider can pick which query types they want to support and would not have to add extra irrelevant query options to reach a certain query support level.   

As many of the fields, in my suggestion, are booleans we could also turn it into a list of all supported query types which would be shorter than the dictionary structure I suggested previously.

Author: Since the workshop discussions we are now supporting operator-level granularity much like suggested by @JPBergsma. (Please take a look at the latest version and make the actual implementation it is to your liking / cover all cases you feel are relevant.)

    It SHOULD only be given if the field :field:`query` is set to the string :val:`"partial"`.
    Formatting in the text SHOULD use Markdown in the `CommonMark v3.0 format <https://spec.commonmark.org/0.30/>`__.

  - :field:`unit-definitions`: List.
    A list of definitions of the symbols used in the Property Definition (including nested Inner Property Definitions) for physical units given as values of the :field:`x-optimade-unit` field.
    See subsection `Physical Units in Property Definitions`_ for the details on how units are represented in OPTIMADE Property Definitions and the precise format of this dictionary.

  - :field:`sortable`: Boolean.
    If :val:`TRUE`, specifies that results can be sorted on this property (see `Entry Listing URL Query Parameters`_ for more information on this field).
    If :val:`FALSE`, specifies that results cannot be sorted on this property.

>     The field not being included means the same as :val:`FALSE`.

Reviewer 6: This should use the same tokens for bools as https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE/pull/348, so linking that here...

Author: Indeed, lets make sure #348 is merged before this.

Reviewer 5: Not sure if #348 is a blocker for this PR. Current PR only wants to use boolean-typed properties which is already possible within the specification. There is already a property using them. I guess @ml-evs suggestion here was to use consistent boolean lexems throughout the document.

Author: Boolean PR merged, so it should be ok regardless.

  - :field:`resource-uris`: List.
    A list of dictionaries that references remote resources that describe the property.
    The format of each dictionary is:

    **REQUIRED keys:**

    - :field:`relation`: String.
      A human-readable description the relationship between the property and the remote resource, e.g., "natural language description".

    - :field:`uri`: String.
      A URI of the external resource.

**REQUIRED keys for all Property Definitions:**

> - :field:`type`: String or List.

Reviewer: This "type" definiton part should be next to "title" and "description" based on its importance.

Author: The reason it is down here is because it is required on all levels of a property definition. Lets first sort out whether we need to keep the distinction between the outermost level or (as you are suggesting across your comments) we can remove that.

  The string or list specifies the type of the defined property.
  It MUST be one of:

>   - One of the strings :val:`"boolean"`, :val:`"object"` (refers to an OPTIMADE dictionary), :val:`"array"` (refers to an OPTIMADE list), :val:`"number"` (refers to an OPTIMADE float), :val:`"string"`, or :val:`"integer"`.

Reviewer: If we do not want to make Optimade types aligned with JSON schema types the mapping between the two different naming could stay in the appendix.

>   - One of the strings :val:`"boolean"`, :val:`"object"` (refers to an OPTIMADE dictionary), :val:`"array"` (refers to an OPTIMADE list), :val:`"number"` (refers to an OPTIMADE float), :val:`"string"`, or :val:`"integer"`.

Reviewer 6: Did we have consensus on specifying array shapes in #270 to add them here as a specific extension key (presumably under the section **OPTIONAL keys for Property Definitions where the type field includes "array":**)?

Reviewer: I was pushing shape but in the end, it makes sense to use the same definition as in JSON schema.
An "array" is actually "optimade" list. A multidimensional array/list is represented as an array of arrays.
The shape can be expressed as "maxItems" and "minItems".

Reviewer 6: I quite liked `shape` and wouldn't mind having it as an extension/duplication of the JSONSchema definition too. Presumably you end up with a nested `items` field right? Does that lead to an explosion of `type` fields too (i.e. one per final value)? Could give an example for our current `lattice_vectors` definition?

Reviewer: It would basically be pure JSON schema without references and with the OPTIMADE specific fields (note: the structure/name of the fields here still need to be determined). Example for `lattice_vector`:
```json
"properties": { 
  "lattice_vectors": { 
    "title": "Lattice Vectors", 
    "description": "...", 
    "x-optimade-definition": { 
      "unit": "Angstrom", 
      "sortable": false
    }, 
    "type": "array", 
    "minItems": 3, 
    "maxItems": 3, 
    "items": { 
      "type": "array", 
      "minItems": 3, 
      "maxItems": 3, 
      "items": { 
        "type": ["number", "null"], 

      } 
    } 
  },
  ...
}
 
```

Author: There are usually a few voices against unnecessary duplication, with one of the common arguments that it adds extra strain on implementations to decide what to do if the duplicated info conflicts. While I can be a bit pragmatic on that point, here I struggle to see what use-case the duplication has on the specification side. It seems more or less trivial to write a piece of code (in any language) that traverses the tree on the client side and appends these `shape` entries from "minItems" and "maxItems" if your implementation has use for them.

Also, is the intent that `min/maxItems` MUST be present if `shape` is present? If it is acceptable to only give `shape`, then all implementations are forced to parse both (in case only `shape` is present); and someone using the property definition as a JSON schema would have to translate `shape` into `min/maxItems` if missing?...

Reviewer: I was the one who always recommended using `array` with `shape` rather than `list` of `list` (current) but if we can switch to one which is FULLY compatible with JSON schema then we should choose only that representation.

Transversing of the tree is not always possible (eg: an array of tuples, an array of array of dictionaries, an array of array of integers or floats ) but it is not something that we have to solve.

One extra benefit of the `array` of `array` with `min/maxItems` definition (JSON Schema) that you do not need to worry about is the data is colonm or row-major...

Author: > Transversing of the tree is not always possible (eg: an array of tuples, an array of array of dictionaries, an array of array of integers or floats ) but it is not something that we have to solve.

I'm not sure I follow this. I'm just saying that if you have a standard JSON schema in a data structure that can host that information in your programming language of choice, I can supply you with the code to traverse that data structure and add shape entries everywhere where it makes sense.

Nevertheless, it seems we are in agreement NOT to add shape entries if we can otherwise adhere to standard JSON schema (which we presently do). So, I'll mark this as resolved. Feel free to unresolve and comment if you disagree.

  - A list where the first item MUST be one of the strings above, and the second item MUST be the string :val:`"null"`.

..

>   Implementation notes:

Reviewer: I think these notes are very important and help a lot with the goal/implementation so the beginning of the "Property Definitions" part might be a better place for them.

Author: I see in your compound edit suggestion that you inserted "Nevertheless, for consistency across formats, the JSON type names MUST be used regardless of the standard type names of the output format." in the top paragraph after the remark that OPTIMADE types are used in the section. I think that becomes a bit confusing, because with that placement it isn't clear that this remark pertains to the type field (and actually *only* to the type field).

Reviewer: You are right it is indeed confusing a little. I think it might be better to use only OPTIMADE types in the main text and referring to JSON specific type mapping located in the appendix.

    - The strings used in the :field:`type` field are JSON type names encoded as strings, but they technically refer to the corresponding OPTIMADE data types.
      Nevertheless, for consistency across formats, the JSON type names MUST be used regardless of the standard type names of the output format.
      The motivation for this design decision is that it makes the JSON representation of a Property Definition a fully valid standard JSON Schema.

    - The allowed values of the :field:`type` field are highly restricted compared to what is permitted using the full JSON Schema standard.
      Values can only be defined to be a single OPTIMADE data type or, optionally, :val:`null`.
      This restriction is intended to reduce the complexity of possible data types that implementations have to handle in different formats and database backends.

**OPTIONAL keys for all Property Definitions:**

> - :field:`x-optimade-unit`: String.

Reviewer: As I mentioned before this can be simplified to "unit" as part of the "x-optimade-definitions"

Author: Workshop resolution: for now, lets keep it outside.

  The string is the symbol for the physical unit in which the value of the defined property is given, if it uses a unit.
  See subsection `Physical Units in Property Definitions`_ for the details on how units are represented in OPTIMADE Property Definitions and the precise format of this string.

> - :field:`enum`: List.

Reviewer: JSON schema defines the enum quite differently than other programming languages. Although it is "allowed" I think it doesn't make sense to use enum for lists dicts floats etc... without any future explanation, it only makes sense for strings and integers.

Reviewer: As we only use the subset of JSON schema we can easily restrict enum for only strings and integers now and allow it later when needed.

Author: We can, but do we want to restrict the ability to define a property to be a list which can only take certain values?, e.g.
```
  enum: [[1,0,0], [0,1,0], [0,0,1]]
```
It seems this could be useful. I'll try to come up with a more concrete example.

Reviewer: Indeed it could be useful, but unfortunately, I'm not sure it will work. I think the issue here is similar to the array= list of list question.
In JSON schema the Enum values are defined for the types rather than the data structure.
```
"the_name_of_the_property:": {
  "type": "array",
    "items": {
      "type": "integer"
      "enum": [0, 1]
    }
  }
}
```
As far as I know, you cannot define an enumeration as in your example.

Reviewer: Although I do not find any documentation about it, but your example might work.
```yaml
      test:
        type: "array"
        items: 
          type: "integer" 
          enum: [0, 1]
      test_array:
        type: "array"
        enum: [[0, 1]]
        items: 
          type: "integer" 
```
I managed to validate the schema which contained the two definitions above.

Author: Your example is how I understood the enum section of the JSON schema documentation: 

*"An instance validates successfully against [the enum keyword] if its value is equal to one of the elements in this keyword's array value.*"

It just says that the value must be equal, with no other restrictions regarding sub-structures appearing inside the enum array.

Reviewer: Perfect! I hope we won't have any contradictions like this :)
```yaml
test: 
  type: "array" 
  enum: [[0, 1]]
  items: 
    type: "integer" 
    enum: [2, 3] 
```

Author: Well, from the JSON schema perspective, your last example just means that no value can ever validate. From the property definition side, I suppose this is an internally inconsistent property definition.

But, hence, I'll mark this "resolved" as there appears to be no need to limit this functionality of JSON schema.

  The defined property MUST take one of the values given in the provided list.
  The items in the list MUST all be of a data type that matches the :field:`type` field and otherwise adhere to the rest of the Property Description.
  If this key is given, for :val:`null` to be a valid value of the defined property, the list MUST contain a `null` value and the :field:`type` MUST be a list where the second value is the string "null".

> - :field:`deprecated`: Boolean.

Reviewer: I think this is a little confusing here although the JSON schema allows it.
If the property is deprecated or not, shouldn't be in its own definition especially since the optimade API already defines such warnings for the responses.
https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE/blob/develop/optimade.rst#42json-response-schema-common-fields

Author: Echoing a comment further up, the property definitions will not just used as part of an implementation, but to distribute machine-readable "lists" of property definitions outside of a specific implementation to communicate what properties an implementation has to support and how. For that use, a `deprecated` field does seem useful, and since JSON API defines a standard one, why not use it?

Reviewer: No hard feeling about this so please feel free to resolve it.

  The length of the string is defined according to :RFC:`8259`.

- :field:`minLength`: Integer.
  A non-negative integer.
  The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
  The length of the string is defined according to :RFC:`8259`.

- :field:`pattern`: String.
  The defined property MUST adhere to the format as specified by the given string when interpreted as a regular expression according to the ECMA-262 regular expression dialect.

- :field:`format`: String.
  MUST be one of the following values to indicate that the defined property is a string that MUST adhere to the specified format:

  - "date-time": the date-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
  - "date": the full-date production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
  - "time": the full-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
  - "duration": the duration production in :RFC:`3339` Appendix A.
  - "email": the "Mailbox" ABNF rule in :RFC:`5321` section 4.1.2.
  - "uri": the extended "Mailbox" ABNF rule in :RFC:`6531`, section 3.3.

**REQUIRED keys for Property Definitions where the type field includes "array":**

> - :field:`items`: Dictionary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :field:`items`: List.
```

Author: No?... in JSON Schema `items` should have a value that is a valid JSON schema, which in OPTIMADE types is a dictionary, right?

https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core.html#rfc.section.10.3.1.2

Reviewer: Indeed you are right, my bad!

  No restriction is inferred from this field for keys in the defined property that do not match any key in the given dictionary.

Physical Units in Property Definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In OPTIMADE, there is no facility to allow a property to be represented in a choice of units, e.g., either ångström (Å) or meters.
The unit is always permanently fixed by the Property Definition.
Clients and servers that use other units internally thus have to do unit conversions as part of preparing and processing OPTIMADE responses.

The physical unit of a property, the embedded items of a list, or values of a dictionary, are defined with the field :field:`x-optimade-unit`.
This field MUST be given with a non-:val:`null` value both at the highest level in the OPTIMADE Property Definition and in any nested Inner Property Definitions for which the value represented has a physical unit.
If the value is unitless, e.g., a string representing a chemical formula or an integer counting the number of atoms in the unit cell :field:`x-optimade-unit`: MUST be omitted or given as :val:`null`.

> A standard set of unit symbols for OPTIMADE are taken from version 3.09 unit database `definition.units` from `GNU units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__.

Reviewer 6: I'm personally okay with the GNU units database (it would be nice if there is a public units API somewhere so the conversion can be done automatically by clients). The only edge case I can think of that might be relevant to our field is when a quantity is returned as a logarithm. Should we have an explicit allowance for that?

Author: Very good point. What would be a good way to handle this? A log-prefix? `ln-angstroms` and `log-angstroms` (intentionally using the dash to separate this from other constructs) for returning `ln(x)` and `log(x)` where `x` is the value in Å? Does constructs such as `ln-angstrom/ln-electronvolt` vs. `angstrom/ln-electronvolt` make sense?

Author: Ah, but there would be no way to do `ln(angstrom/electronvolt)` as the unit then, which arguably makes more sense than `angstrom/ln(electronvolt)`. Perhaps just a scheme of allowing a single prefix + space for a function that applies to all units is better. E.g.`ln angstrom`, `ln angstrom/electronvolt`, `log angstrom/electronvolt`, etc.

I can't really see a practical usecase for things like `angstrom/ln-electronvolt`. At least not more so than allowing any arbitrary mathematical expression, which IMO is too far (e.g., `sin(angstrom)` units).

Reviewer 6: I like the second suggestion!

Reviewer 2: The result of a transcendental function such as ln(x) or sin(x) is always dimensionless.
See [https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/ed1000476](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/ed1000476) If necessary you should divide by a normalization constant before applying the function.

Reviewer 6: > The result of a transcendental function such as ln(x) or sin(x) is always dimensionless.
> See https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/ed1000476 If necessary you should divide by a normalization constant before applying the function.

For expressions/dimensional analysis, sure, but here the normalizing constant is always 1 right? We are just using `ln <unit>` as short-hand for `e^(ln(<value>)) <unit>`.

I don't think we should overthink this edgecase really, the intention of my initial comment was just to cover things like mobilities/concentrations where quantities can vary across (say) 6 orders of magnitude that would be awkward to filter on otherwise.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the value of the  normalizing constant is always 1 It is just there to remove the unit..

Author: @ml-evs ; isn't the point of @JPBergsma that a formally correct way of doing this is to always define these value as unitless, and ask people who want to use them to put in the description of the quantity what normalizing constant to us, e.g., *"This field is the logarithm of the supercell length a, ln(a*R0) where R0 is the Rydberg constant."*

Do you agree with this? Then we don't need this functionality.

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking, the value of a property, like pH, does not have a unit, as it is dimensionless.

If we, however, allow databases to implement custom units with a logarithm, like a pH, and we also want to allow automatic unit conversion, we do need to define how to do this conversion. 
For this, the proposal of Matthew could be useful.   

In case of pH, the normalization constant would be 1 mol/L(neglecting activities). So you could define pH as  value = -log(c/(1 mol/L)) where c is the concentration, although we could also use a generic x for the converted value.
For example, for pH 2 :

2 = -log(c/(1 mol/L))
-2 = log(c/(1 mol/L))
10^-2 = c/(1 mol/L)
10^-2 mol/L = c

The question in this case is then, do we still want to call it a unit ? Or do we want a different name like  "conversion_function" or something else?

I also wonder how other databases handle this kind of situations.

Reviewer 6: > @ml-evs ; isn't the point of @JPBergsma that a formally correct way of doing this is to always define these value as unitless, and ask people who want to use them to put in the description of the quantity what normalizing constant to use, e.g., _"This field is the logarithm of the supercell length a, ln(aR0) where R0 is the Rydberg constant."_
> 
> Do you agree with this? Then we don't need this functionality.

I still think the most pragmatic approach is to allow log prefixes (e.g., `log`, `ln`, `log2`, or  `log10`, `log`, `log2` to follow NumPy) such that a client knows that if it exponentiates the provided value it will end up with a quantity in the units following the log prefix, BUT this really does just feel like an edge case, so I would not be against the suggestion above.

Unless we define a standardized OPTIMADE field that needs logs, we are arguing here about custom provider fields that will probably not exist. If we were astrOPTIMADE, or if we want to target more general scientific APIs, then maybe this would be more important...

If the unit is available in this database, or if it can be expressed as a compound unit expression using these units, the value of :field:`x-optimade-unit` SHOULD be set to the corresponding (compound) string symbol and no further definition be given.

> Compound unit expressions are created by combining unit symbols defined in the GNU units database, optionally prefixed by one or more of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by trailing '-'), multiplication '*', division '/', and power '^' directly followed by a positive integer.

Reviewer 6: Very minor, but these single char operators become difficult to read in the GitHub rendered view (for me at least), might be clearer in monospace with/without the quotes:

```suggestion
Compound unit expressions are created by combining unit symbols defined in the GNU units database, optionally prefixed by one or more of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by trailing `-`), multiplication `*`, division `/`, and power `^` directly followed by a positive integer.
```

> Compound unit expressions are created by combining unit symbols defined in the GNU units database, optionally prefixed by one or more of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by trailing `-`), multiplication `*`, division `/`, and power `^` directly followed by a positive integer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compound unit expressions are created by combining unit symbols defined in the GNU units database. These unit symbols may be prefixed by one of the prefixes defined in the database (indicated there by trailing `-`). This database can be found in the file: "definitions.units", which can be extracted from the [Source Distribution](http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/units/) 
The unit should be separated by a multipliction `*` or division `/` symbol.
A `^` symbol followed by a positive integer can be used to indicate the power of the preceding unit. e.g. `m^3` for cubic meter.
```
I found this sentence quite long and confusing, I therefore broke it up into shorter sentences.

It was also not immediately clear where I could find the list of prefixes and unit symbols of the gnu database. I therefore pointed out where I found it. Feel free to change it if you know a better location.  

In section 4 of the manual of the Gnu units it says "Only one prefix is permitted per
unit, so 'micromicrofarad' will fail.  However, prefixes can appear
alone with no unit following them, so 'micro*microfarad' will work, as
will 'micro microfarad'." So I think it the simplest would be to say that only one prefix is allowed.

I was also wondering whether we allow fractional powers? For example, a unit of volume to the power 1/3. This is allowed in the gnu database but not in the standard described here.

Author: I rather heavily edited your suggestion to be more precise, IMO in a more logical order, and with just one sentence per row (as is our standard now) - and then committed it. Take a look if you are ok with the new version and comment if you want to suggest further edits.

However, about the prefixes + prefixes. I don't see anything in the current proposed writing that allows bare prefixes in our limited version of GNU units use. Should we allow that? (Why?)

Reviewer 2: Your edit looks good.
 And I do not see any reason to allow double prefixes.
 The only question left is whether we want to use fractional powers.

Furthermore:

> - No whitespace, parenthesis, or other symbols than specified above are permitted.

Reviewer 2: How would you distinguish between meter and mili if you can't use a space?
mN could be both miliNewton and meter Newton.

Reviewer 6: > How would you distinguish between meter and mili if you can't use a space?
> mN could be both miliNewton and meter Newton.

This is where you would use "*", e.g. `mN` and `m*N`.

Some tests:

```
$ units "Nm"
Unknown unit 'Nm'

$ units "nm"
        Definition: nano m = 1e-09 m

$ units "m*N"
        Definition: 1 kg m^2 / s^2

$ units "mN"
        Definition: milli N = 0.001 kg m / s^2
```

Reviewer 2: Ah yes, you are right. In the standard, they always use a space, but you are allowed to use a '*' as well. A '*' has a slightly different meaning than a space. A space is processed before a slash, while a "*" has the same precedence as a slash. Perhaps this is better, as the example they gave `m/s s/day` is rather confusing. I would interpret it as m/day but according to the standard it should be m/(s^2 day).

> - If multiple string representations of the same unit exist in `definition.units`, the *first one* in that file consisting of only lowercase letter characters and no symbols SHOULD be used.

Reviewer 6: I found one exception to this in the unit database, which is `kcal_mol`. So I guess underscores should also be allowed?

```suggestion
- If multiple string representations of the same unit exist in `definition.units`, the *first one* in that file consisting of only lowercase letter characters and no non-underscore symbols SHOULD be used.
```

Author: Good catch! But, is there a reason you did not formulate this as: "... consisting of only lowercase letter characters and underscore symbols SHOULD be used." ?

Reviewer 6: Updated my suggestion above. Does "lowercase letters" exclude e.g. "å", i.e. do we want to force the anglicised "angstrom" over "ångström"?

Author: Good thinking, it probably should be: "... the first one in that file consisting of only lowercase characters a-z, underscores, and no symbols SHOULD be used."

Reviewer 2: I think kcal_mol would be better written as kcal/mol. There are however also other units with an underscore, such as for example `m_e`, the electron mass, so we should allow it.

Numbers may also occur in units definitions, such as mmH2O for pressure and epsilon0 for permittivity.

Reviewer 6: > I think kcal_mol would be better written as kcal/mol. There are however also other units with an underscore, such as for example `m_e`, the electron mass, so we should allow it.

`m_e` would then fall under the rule of "use the first one in the file", i.e. `electronmass`. As you say, `kcal/mol` works and is nicer, which muddies the water a bit...

Author: I don't see how any textual representation of units can be normalize to a degree where there wouldn't be options like `kcal_mol` vs `kcal/mol` unless we say to ONLY use SI units (and in that case, what to do for quantities that do not have standardized SI units, e.g., hardness?)

Reviewer 2: I think every quantitative physical or chemical property can be described with SI units.
There are multiple definitions of hardness, so you would have to specify in your property description which you use.
For example the unit of Brinell hardness would be N/m^2 or kg/m/s^2
You are probably thinking about Mohs hardness, which is a ranking of materials rather than a quantitive measure and would therefore be dimensionless.

Author: > I think every quantitative physical or chemical property can be described with SI units.

Hmm... Let's go for a more clear example: what is the SI unit for smell/odor? A non-SI unit is the 'olf'. Can you convert 1 olf into SI units?

> There are multiple definitions of hardness, so you would have to specify in your property description which you use.
For example the unit of Brinell hardness would be N/m^2 or kg/m/s^2

My point was that some of those hardness definitions are not so easy to meaningfully express in SI units.

Reviewer 2: Are properties like beauty, pain and odour physical properties? I think it is quite subjective how you experience these.

Some of these hardness measuring techniques measure a combination of physical properties (elastic deformity, yield-stress, etc.) so it may indeed not be so easy to convert one into the other without extra information.

- The unit symbols MUST appear in alphabetical order.
- Consecutive divisions, e.g., :val:`a/b/c` are interpreted separately, i.e., :val:`b` and :val:`c` are both interpreted to be to the power of -1.

If a (compound) symbol based on the GNU units database is not used, the string in :field:`x-optimade-unit` MUST be defined in the :field:`unit-definitions` field inside the :field:`x-optimade-definition` field in the topmost level of the Property Definition.

The :field:`x-optimade-unit` field is a list of dictionaries that has the following format:

**REQUIRED keys:**

- :field:`symbol`: String.
  Specifies the symbol to be used in :field:`x-optimade-unit` to reference this unit.

- :field:`title`: String.
  A human-readable single-line string name for the unit.

- :field:`description`: String.
  A human-readable multiple-line detailed description of the unit.

**OPTIONAL keys:**

- :field:`standard`: Dictionary.
  This field is used to define the unit symbol using a preexisting standard.
  The dictionary has the following format:

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`name`: String.
    The abbreviated name of the standard being referenced.

>     One of the following:

Reviewer 6: Perhaps I am misunderstanding, but should GNU units be another allowed value (and the default) here?

Reviewer: I completely agree "gnu" can be the default value here and if somebody wants to chose another unit definition they can.

Author: I started adding this, but realized that it may be a bit problematic, and I also don't quite see why we need it.

For GNU-unit units you are meant to leave out the OPTIONAL key 'standard' entirely. If we define `gnu` (or maybe better `gnu_units`) as a value to `name` in the `standard` field to refer to the same thing as not providing the `standard` field at all, how should a client interpret the situation when an implementation adds `resource-uris` that contradicts the definition of the unit according to the documentation of GNU units? (E.g., the new mass definition vs. the old one). If our default unit system is only accessible by NOT providing `standard`, then the interpretation is unambigous.

Reviewer: It would be nice to allow to use of a different version of gnu units other than 3.09.
If you do not provide `standard` you cannot define `version`. I think having contradicted `resource-uris` is a different question.

Author: Workshop note: resolved by adding "gnu units" as a value, and actually now requiring that `standard` is present in all cases.

    - :val:`"ucum"`: the symbol comes from `The Unified Code for Units of Measure <https://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum.html>`__ (UCUM) standard.
    - :val:`"qudt"`: the symbol comes from the `QUDT <http://qudt.org/>`__ standard.
      Not only symbols strictly defined within the QUDT standard are allowed, but also other symbols constructed by following to the scheme for how new unit symbols are formed in this standard.

  - :field:`version`: String.
    The version string of the referenced standard.

  - :field:`symbol`: String.
    The symbol to use from the referenced standard, expressed according to that standard.

- :field:`resource-uris`: List.
  A list of dictionaries that references remote resources that describe the unit.
  The format of each dictionary is:

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`relation`: String.
    A human-readable description of the relationship between the unit and the remote resource, e.g., a "natural language description".

  - :field:`uri`: String.
    A URI of the external resource.

> Unrecognized keys in property definitions

Reviewer: I would wait until the first use case before we put this part into the optimade specification. Right now I do not see the need to allow or restrict anything about unrecognised keys.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Implementations MAY add their own keys both inside and outside of :field:`x-optimade-description` on the form :field:`x-exmpl-name` where :field:`exmpl` is the database-specific prefix (without underscore characters) and :field:`name` is the part of the key chosen by the implementation.
Implementations MUST NOT add keys to property definitions on other formats.

Client and server implementations that interpret an OPTIMADE Property Definition and encounter unrecognized keys starting with :field:`x-exmpl-` where :field:`exmpl` is a recognized database prefix MAY issue errors or warnings.
Other unrecognized keys starting with :field:`x-` MUST not issue errors, SHOULD NOT issue warnings, and MUST otherwise be ignored.

> To allow forward compatibility with future versions of both OPTIMADE and the JSON Schema standards, unrecognized keys that do not start with :field:`x-` SHOULD issue a warning but MUST otherwise be ignored.

Author: In that case, what is your reading of the specification with this information omitted? Is an implementation that adds its own keys conformat to OPTIMADE or not?

> To allow forward compatibility with future versions of both OPTIMADE and the JSON Schema standards, unrecognized keys that do not start with :field:`x-` SHOULD issue a warning but MUST otherwise be ignored.

Reviewer: I think adding keys to inside and outside of :field:`x-optimade-description` are completely different cases.

1) adding key into x-optimade-description (not likely):
  a) "x-" prefix is not necessary anymore
  b) we are conflicting with previous specifications because the new keys are not REQUIRED nor OPTIONAL.

2) adding arbitrary keys outside with "x-" is allowed by the [OPENAPI](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/openapi-extensions/) and independent from JSON schema

In conclusion:
- the field `x-optimade-description` should contain only the defined REQUIRED and OPTIONAL keys.
- other extensions with "x-" could be added by the user to the OPENAPI schema without any warning or error and this includes the property definitions as well

I think this is the expected behaviour (base on the definition and industry standards) if we just skip this whole part.

> To allow forward compatibility with future versions of both OPTIMADE and the JSON Schema standards, unrecognized keys that do not start with :field:`x-` SHOULD issue a warning but MUST otherwise be ignored.

Author: 1.  
    a) I landed in keeping the `x-` prefix also inside `x-optimade-description` to make sure implementations can completely rely on their added keys not being overridden by future OPTIMADE specs. How do you propose to ensure that otherwise?

    b) If you feel strongly about this being confusing, I suppose we could add a comment under OPTIONAL keys to say that others keys may appear and are handled according to the `Unrecognized keys in property definitions` subsection.

2. OPENAPI may allow adding arbitrary keys with `x-` prefixes, but from what writing in the OPTIMADE specification do you derive that this freedom carries over to an OPTIMADE property definition if we don't say that? There are plenty of other OPENAPI features that we don't support.

I also would strongly prefer keeping the option for implementation-specific keys inside `x-optimade-description`. Implementation-specific keys in other contexts are one of the most useful aspects of OPTIMADE.

> To allow forward compatibility with future versions of both OPTIMADE and the JSON Schema standards, unrecognized keys that do not start with :field:`x-` SHOULD issue a warning but MUST otherwise be ignored.

Reviewer: > 1. a) I landed in keeping the `x-` prefix also inside `x-optimade-description` to make sure implementations can completely rely on their added keys not being overridden by future OPTIMADE specs. How do you propose to ensure that otherwise?
>    b) If you feel strongly about this being confusing, I suppose we could add a comment under OPTIONAL keys to say that others keys may appear and are handled according to the `Unrecognized keys in property definitions` subsection.

I think the field `x-optimade-description`(or similar) should contain only the defined REQUIRED and OPTIONAL keys. As suggested before the specification should not have the "Unrecognized keys in property definitions" subsection. 
In that case, you do not need to use "x-optimade-" prefix and you will never have any name conflict.

> 2. OPENAPI may allow adding arbitrary keys with `x-` prefixes, but from what writing in the OPTIMADE specification do you derive that this freedom carries over to an OPTIMADE property definition if we don't say that? There are plenty of other OPENAPI features that we don't support.
> 
> I also would strongly prefer keeping the option for implementation-specific keys inside `x-optimade-description`. Implementation-specific keys in other contexts are one of the most useful aspects of OPTIMADE.

I might be confused here. 
- If it is about database-specific properties (like _exmpl_DFT_prarameters) then each of these should contain an `x-optimade-description` field.
- If it is a case of some specific keys of a given property (like an extra feature/info of that property eg. bit_resolution=32), I do not see any reason to store these implementation-specific keys inside `x-optimade-description`. At the data level, something similar would be to allow adding any database-specific properties into species and assembly?!?!
I think you should do the same thing here as in the database, namely: You can easily store them in eg: "x-exmpl" or "x-exmpl-description" etc. because they are implementation-specific keys. 
Could you please give me an example of what implementation-specific keys you could have?

> To allow forward compatibility with future versions of both OPTIMADE and the JSON Schema standards, unrecognized keys that do not start with :field:`x-` SHOULD issue a warning but MUST otherwise be ignored.

Author: > * If it is about database-specific properties (like _exmpl_DFT_prarameters) then each of these should contain an `x-optimade-description` field.

No, we are talking about adding meta-data keys that are specific to your own implementation to the standard property definitions in such a way that clients that do not know what they mean are not confused by them.

We are also talking about how to make sure that future updates to the standard doesn't require a major version number just because we are adding a new optional meta-data-field to the property definition standard.

> * If it is a case of some specific keys of a given property (like an extra feature/info of that property eg. bit_resolution=32), I do not see any reason to store these implementation-specific keys inside `x-optimade-description`. At the data level, something similar would be to allow adding any database-specific properties into species and assembly?!?!

Here is an example that makes sense to me: maybe I want to add `x-httk-ui-color` to all `x-optimade-description` dictionaries so that I in my own graphical UI that interacts with my own database over OPTIMADE can color properties according to some helpful scheme. Other clients seeing those `x-httk-...` keys are told to ignore them, unless someone else likes the idea and add support for this in their own GUI.

>   I think you should do the same thing here as in the database, namely: You can easily store them in eg: "x-exmpl" or "x-exmpl-description" etc. because they are implementation-specific keys.
>   Could you please give me an example of what implementation-specific keys you could have?

The above one could surely sit in `x-httk-description`, but, there are arguably reasons to think that it belongs alongside the other entries in `x-optimade-description`.

I'm not sure why you'd argue so intensely against allowing implementation-specific keys inside `x-optimade-description`, would they give you trouble? You need to handle unknown keys there anyway, unless you want your client implementation to break when we update the standard with a new key there.

> To allow forward compatibility with future versions of both OPTIMADE and the JSON Schema standards, unrecognized keys that do not start with :field:`x-` SHOULD issue a warning but MUST otherwise be ignored.

Reviewer: The only reason is to keep it as simple as possible. The `x-optimade-description` should only contain optimade related properties. Everybody has infinite different ways to add any database-specific keys using the  `x-exmpl-` prefix. I can not imagine a situation when `x-optimade-description` would be a better place to store anything rather than eg: `x-exmpl-whatever`.
I think it does not make sense to argue about this so please feel free to resolve it anytime.

> To allow forward compatibility with future versions of both OPTIMADE and the JSON Schema standards, unrecognized keys that do not start with :field:`x-` SHOULD issue a warning but MUST otherwise be ignored.

Author: Workshop resolution: discussed in the workshop and suggested to keep it in for now.

A Property Definition MUST be formatted according to the combination of the requirements in the subsection `Property Definition keys from JSON Schema`_ below and the following additional requirements:

**REQUIRED keys for the outermost level of the Property Definition:**

- :field:`title`: String and :field:`description`: String.
  See the subsection `Property definition keys from a subset of JSON API Schema`_ for the definitions of these fields.
  They are defined in that subsection as OPTIONAL on any level of the Property Definition, but are REQUIRED on the outermost level.

- :field:`x-optimade-property`: Dictionary.
  Additional information to define the property that is not covered by fields in the JSON Schema standard.

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`version`: String.
    This string indicates the version of the property definition.
    The string SHOULD be in the format described by the `semantic versioning v2 <https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html>` standard.

  **OPTIONAL keys:**

>   - :field:`property-uri`: String.

Author: Workshop note: May need a parallel URL as well that SHOULD be resolvable.

  A (compound) symbol for the physical unit in which the value of the defined property is given, if it uses a unit.
  If the :field:`x-optimade-unit` is omitted, it designates a unitless quantity or a field for which no unit is relevant (e.g., a String).
  See subsection `Compound Units Expression in Property Definitions`_ for the details on how compound units are represented in OPTIMADE Property Definitions and the precise format of this string.

- :field:`x-optimade-implementation`: Dictionary
  A dictionary describing the level of OPTIMADE API functionality provided by the present implementation.
  If an implementation omits this field in its response, a client interacting with that implementation SHOULD NOT make any assumptions about the availability of these features.
  The dictionary has the following format:

  **OPTIONAL keys:**

  - :field:`sortable`: Boolean.
    If :val:`TRUE`, specifies that results can be sorted on this property (see `Entry Listing URL Query Parameters`_ for more information on this field).
    If :val:`FALSE`, specifies that results cannot be sorted on this property.
    Omitting the field is equivalent to :val:`FALSE`.

>   - :field:`queryable`: String.

Author: Resolved, but somewhat imperfectly. There are a lot of details of the optional features of different combinations of HAS-type operators and other operators that cannot easily be indicated. For example which other fields one can do a correlated list query with. If someone wants to track this down with deeper granularity, that can be done as a follow-up PR.

  If :val:`TRUE`, implementations SHOULD not use the defined property, and it MAY be removed in the future.
  If :val:`FALSE`, the defined property is not deprecated.
  The field not being present means :val:`FALSE`.

- :field:`enum`: List.
  The defined property MUST take one of the values given in the provided list.
  The items in the list MUST all be of a data type that matches the :field:`type` field and otherwise adhere to the rest of the Property Description.
  If this key is given, for :val:`null` to be a valid value of the defined property, the list MUST contain a `null` value and the :field:`type` MUST be a list where the second value is the string "null".

- :field:`examples`: List.
  A list of example values that the defined property can have.
  These examples MUST all be of a data type that matches the :field:`type` field and otherwise adhere to the rest of the Property Description.

Depending on what string the :field:`type` is equal to, or contains as first element, the following additional requirements also apply:

- "object":

  **REQUIRED**

  - :field:`properties`: Dictionary.
    Gives key-value pairs where each value is an inner Property Definition.

>     The defined property is a dictionary that can only contain keys present in this dictionary, and, if so, the corresponding value is descrbied by the respective inner Property Definition.

Author: ```suggestion
    The defined property is a dictionary that can only contain keys present in this dictionary, and, if so, the corresponding value is described by the respective inner Property Definition.
```

  - :field:`maximum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be less than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMaximum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be strictly less than this number; it cannot equal the number.

  - :field:`minimum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be greater than or equal to this number.

  - :field:`exclusiveMinimum`: Float.
    The defined property is a float that MUST be strictly greater than this number; it cannot equal the number.

- "string":

  **OPTIONAL**

  - :field:`maxLength`: Integer.
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
    The length of the string is defined according to :RFC:`8259`.

  - :field:`minLength`: Integer.
    A non-negative integer.
    The defined property is a string that MUST have a length that is less than or equal to the given integer.
    The length of the string is defined according to :RFC:`8259`.

>   - :field:`enum`: List.

Author: Why is enum repeated here

    The defined property MUST take one of the values given in the provided list.
    The items in the list MUST all be of a data type that matches the :field:`type` field and otherwise adhere to the rest of the Property Description.
    If this key is given, for :val:`null` to be a valid value of the defined property, the list MUST contain a `null` value and the :field:`type` MUST be a list where the second value is the string "null".

  - :field:`pattern`: String.

>     The defined property MUST adhere to the format as specified by the given string when interpreted as a regular expression according to the ECMA-262 regular expression dialect.

Author: This is a too complicated issue to sort out here, as there actually is no citable standard for the subset, and we probably do not want to inline the whole subset in the specification. For now I'm removing "pattern" as a valid restriction, and someone will have to work out the details and do a PR to get it back in.

  - :field:`format`: String.
    Choose one of the following values to indicate that the defined property is a string that MUST adhere to the specified format:

    - "date-time": the date-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
    - "date": the full-date production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
    - "time": the full-time production in :RFC:`3339` section 5.6.
    - "duration": the duration production in :RFC:`3339` Appendix A.
    - "email": the "Mailbox" ABNF rule in :RFC:`5321` section 4.1.2.

>     - "uri": the extended "Mailbox" ABNF rule in :RFC:`6531`, section 3.3.

Author: Error: fix to match what is actually in JSON Schema

Physical Units in Property Definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In OPTIMADE, there is no facility to allow a property to be represented in a choice of units, e.g., either ångström (Å) or meters.
The unit is always permanently fixed by the Property Definition.
Clients and servers that use other units internally thus have to do unit conversions as part of preparing and processing OPTIMADE responses.

The physical unit of a property, the embedded items of a list, or values of a dictionary, are defined with the field :field:`x-optimade-unit`.
This field MUST be given with a non-:val:`null` value both at the highest level in the OPTIMADE Property Definition and in any inner Property Definitions for which the value represented has a physical unit.
If the value does not have a unit, e.g., a string representing a chemical formula or an integer counting the number of atoms in the unit cell :field:`x-optimade-unit`: MUST be omitted or given as :val:`null`.

> A standard set of unit symbols for OPTIMADE are taken from version 3.09 unit database :val:`definition.units` from `GNU units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__.

Reviewer 5: I tried to emphasize this during today's web meet. GNU Units database is part of GNU Units software, which is released under GPL-3.0+ license. This is F/LOSS and fine, but GPL means that if we want to incorporate that units database in our validation tools, clients and/or server-side libraries, we will most likely have to release them under GPL as well.

Author: @merkys I'm in a discussion to try to resolve this. Would - if possible - a re-license of specifically the 'definitions.units' file in GNU Units under LGPL be sufficient? I think so, right?

Reviewer 5: @rartino Having `definitions.units` under LGPL would greatly simplify the problem. However, to stay GPL-free we would have to develop all necessary tools to interpret the `definitions.units` as the rest of the code in GNU Units will stay GPL.

Author: @merkys That is true. If we get this relicense to happen, I'm willing to help supply library routines to read 'definitions.units' into useful data structures in different languages. The format isn't very complicated, and in fact arguably is "a standard format" going back to (or is based on) a 'units.dat' format in a `units` tool in very early SYSV, BSD Unix (although I've found it very difficult to find information about that program).

Those that want to, can convert 'definitions.units' into a more machine-friendly format - e.g., json - and (according to my non-lawyer understanding) and distribute it along with their software as long as it is in a separate file clearly licensed under LGPL. But, I think it is preferable for many reasons to let our software just parse the original file on startup instead.

However, this also only applies *if* your software actually need to do unit conversions. I suspect the vast majority of implementations will not need that functionality - they only need to rely on that 'definitions.units' "exists" to pin down a very clearly definition of what "eV/angstrom^2" means. One can still query, fetch, parse, etc., OPTIMADE data without doing any unit conversions.

Author: Resolved: see top-level comment below about licensing of definitions.units-

> A standard set of unit symbols for OPTIMADE are taken from version 3.09 unit database :val:`definition.units` from `GNU units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A standard set of unit symbols for OPTIMADE is taken from version 3.09 unit database :val:`definition.units` from `GNU units software <https://www.gnu.org/software/units/>`__.
```
I think "set" is the subject of this sentence. As set is singular I think it should be is.

> If the unit is available in this database, or if it can be expressed as a compound unit expression using these units, the value of :field:`x-optimade-unit` SHOULD be set to the corresponding (compound) string symbol and no further definition be given.

Author: Workshop note: may want to enforce URI even for default unit definitions?

  - :field:`version`: String.
    The version string of the referenced standard.

  - :field:`symbol`: String.
    The symbol to use from the referenced standard, expressed according to that standard.

- :field:`resource-uris`: List.
  A list of dictionaries that references remote resources that describe the unit.
  The format of each dictionary is:

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`relation`: String.
    A human-readable description of the relationship between the unit and the remote resource, e.g., a "natural language description".

  - :field:`uri`: String.
    A URI of the external resource.

Unrecognized keys in property definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Implementations MAY add their own keys in Property Definitions, both inside and outside of the fields :field:`x-optimade-property`, :field:`x-optimade-implementation`, and :field:`x-optimade-requirements` on the form :field:`x-exmpl-name` where :field:`exmpl` is the database-specific prefix (without underscore characters) and :field:`name` is the part of the key chosen by the implementation.
Implementations MUST NOT add keys to property definitions on other formats.

> Client and server implementations that interpret an OPTIMADE Property Definition and encounter unrecognized keys starting with :field:`x-exmpl-` where :field:`exmpl` is a recognized database prefix MAY issue errors or warnings.

Author: Workshop note: need a better term for recognized database prefix

Author: Resolved by posting issue #413
